51 Special Action Group - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Appearance move to sidebar hide Text Small Standard Large This page always uses small font size Width Standard Wide The content is as wide as possible for your browser window. Color (beta) Automatic Light Dark This page is always in light mode. Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Wikimania 2025 Program Proposals are now open! Click here to Apply Now This application is open until Monday 31st March, 2025 end of day [ Help with translations! ] Toggle the table of contents Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission 2 Composition 3 Equipment 4 Operations carried out 5 References 51 Special Action Group Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Expand all Add interlanguage links Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian counter-terrorism unit hide This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . ( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources . Find sources: ""51 Special Action Group"" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2012 ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations . Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. ( June 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Law enforcement agency 51 Special Action Group 51 SAG Common name Top Men Team Motto Sahas Ki Vijay Bravery Wins Agency overview Formed 1985, 15 December Employees The officers and troops come from various units of Army, trained in various commando courses. Jurisdictional structure Federal agency India Operations jurisdiction India Governing body Ministry of Home Affairs (India) Constituting instrument National Security Guard Act, 1985 General nature Federal law enforcement Operational structure Headquarters New Delhi , India Agency executive Colonel Himanshu Thakran from NAGA Regiment, Group Commander Parent agency National Security Guard Notables Significant operations Operation Black Thunder Operation Snow Storm Operation Mouse Trap Operation Black Tornado Operation Cactus The 51 Special Action Group is a special response unit of the National Security Guards (NSG) of India. It was raised by the Cabinet Secretariat under the National Security Guard Act of 1985. [ 1 ] The Special Action Group (SAG) comprises 54% of the National Security Guards. The 51 SAG forms the offensive arm, with personnel drawn from the Indian Army. The 51 SAG is tasked with counter-terrorism operations, while the 52 SAG is trained and equipped for counter-hijack operations. [ 2 ] Mission [ edit ] 51 Special Action Group's mission is part of the NSG's overall mission to neutralize specific terrorist threats in vital installations or any given area, handle hijack situations involving piracy in the air and on the land, engage and neutralize terrorists in specific situations, and to rescue hostages in kidnap situations. Composition [ edit ] The unit is the smallest combat unit in the SAG counter-terrorist operations, and is called a hit . It has five members: two pairs, or partners and a technical support member. Four hits make a team which is under the command of a captain/team commander. The number of hits used for an intervention job depends on its complexity and the magnitude of the operation. Recently, operational hubs have been raised in Metro cities: Mumbai , Chennai , Hyderabad , Kolkata and Gandhinagar , apart from its headquarters at Manesar ( Haryana ), near the capital New Delhi . [ 3 ] Equipment [ edit ] HK MP5 and its variants such as the MP5SD3 , MP5SD6 , MP5K , and MP5-N Glock 19 SIG Sauer P226 SIG SG 550 and its variants Beretta 92 Franchi SPAS-15 12 gauge combat shotgun PSG-1 sniper rifle MSG-90 sniper rifle Operations carried out [ edit ] Though it is not possible to narrate all the operations carried out by NSG but the summary of important surgical operations carried out by NSG (51 SAG) are given below: Operation Cactus – Commandos were mobilized for the 1988 Maldives coup d'état operations in Male, Maldives. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Operation Mouse Trap – Commandos were deployed in District Taran Taaran (Punjab). More than 25 militants were killed and a large number of weapons & ammunition were recovered. [ 6 ] Operation Agni Baan – Punjab terrorists were holed up inside a house in Baroda. 2 terrorists were killed and their weapons recovered. Operation Ghost Buster – 51 SAG was deployed with SIT for search and strike missions after the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi. Operation Sudarshan – 51 SAG was deployed at Ayodhya during Demolition of the Babri Masjid Operation Winter Storm – 51 SAG along with supporting elements were moved on 27 Oct 93 to Srinagar to flush out militants from Hazratbal Shrine. Operations were called off after a prolonged siege of almost a month though the final preparations for assault had been made. Operation Vajrashakti in Akshardham Temple – 51 SAG was flown to rescue hostages held by terrorist in Akshardham Temple Gandhinagar. This was the first operation in which two commandos of 51 SAG attained martyrdom. All the militants were killed with no casualties to hostages & damage to the temple. [ 7 ] Operation Trident, Black Tornado and Cyclone – Recently held operations to flush out the terrorists and rescue hostages post multiple attacks across Mumbai. Major Sandeep Unnikrishnan & Havaldar Gajender Singh made their supreme sacrifice while combating the terrorists. [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Operation Dhangu – The Army justified the deployment of 51 SAG (NSG) in the operation against the six terrorists at the Pathankot airbase, saying that the three service chiefs had taken the call jointly so that the elite combat force could deal with any hostage crisis in the airbase which had around 3,000 family members of IAF personnel and 23 trainees from four foreign countries at the time of the attack. Commander of the Army's Western Command Lt Gen K J Singh said the 51 SAG (NSG) was deployed as it is a force specially trained to deal with a hostage crisis. Apart from family members, 23 trainees from Afghanistan, Nigeria, Sri Lanka and Myanmar were at the airbase when terrorists struck. Singh said the strategic forward airbase of the IAF at Pathankot remained fully functional all through the 'Operation Dhangu', the codename given to the mission to eliminate the terrorists. On 3 January, when two terrorists had entered the barracks inside the airbase, six IAF personnel were stuck on the first floor of the building, Lt Gen Singh said. The commandos rappelled down to the building roof, broke the window on the first floor and evacuated IAF men. Thereafter the building was demolished with the help of IEDs to neutralise the terrorists. [ 10 ] [ 11 ] References [ edit ] ^ ""Army Chief honours 51 special action group of the national security guards"" . The Times of India . 24 August 2020. Archived from the original on 25 August 2020 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . ^ Sabarwal, Harshit (24 August 2020). ""Army Chief honours 51 SAG of the National Security Guard"" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 24 August 2020 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . ^ ""Gujarat gets new NSG hub; fifth in the country"" . The Economic Times . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . ^ Sibal, Sidhant (2 November 2020). ""Operation Cactus: How India helped the Maldives in November, 1988"" . Wion . Archived from the original on 2 November 2020 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . ^ ""Maldives grateful to India for being a 'true friend': Abdulla Shahid remembers Operation Cactus"" . The Times of India . 3 November 2020. Archived from the original on 3 November 2020 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . ^ Mohan, Vijay (7 February 2006). ""Surprise was key element of Operation Mouse Trap"" . The Tribune . Archived from the original on 14 February 2006 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . ^ ""2002 Akshardham temple attack accused Yasin Butt arrested from Jammu & Kashmir by Gujarat ATS"" . Times Now News . Archived from the original on 26 July 2019 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . ^ ""Operation Black Tornado: How NSG commandoes ended the siege of Mumbai"" . Times Now News . Archived from the original on 26 November 2020 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . ^ Krishnan, Raghu (25 November 2020). ""Let us remember not just the horror of 26/11 but the heroes"" . Economic Times Blog . Archived from the original on 25 November 2020 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . ^ ""How NSG commandos neutralized the terrorists at Pathankot Air Force base"" . The Times of India . 5 January 2016. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . ^ Sura, Ajay (7 January 2016). ""Pathankot attack: How 'Operation Dhangu' was won"" . The Times of India . Archived from the original on 8 January 2016 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . show v t e Law enforcement in India Law of India Constitution Amendments Basic structure Directive Principles Fundamental Duties Fundamental Rights Judicial Review Criminal Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam Capital Punishment Cognisable offence Civil and Personal Code of Civil Procedure Modern Hindu law Christian Personal law Muslim Personal Law Historic Code of Criminal Procedure Hindu Personal Law History of Indian law Indian Penal Code Judiciary Supreme Court Chief Justice Judges High Courts Chief Justices Judges District Courts Chief Judicial Magistrate Court District Munsiff Court Subordinate Courts Gram Nyayalayas Lok Adalat Tribunals Ministries & departments Central Law Commission Ministry of Home Affairs Ministry of Law and Justice States Bihar Kerala Maharashtra Tamil Nadu Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Crimes Against children Against women Caste related Corruption Human rights Mass surveillance Rape Suicide Organised Drugs Black money Hawala Paid media Scandals Terrorism Records and tracking National Crime Records Bureau Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems Intelligence agencies Bureau of Police Research and Development Directorate of Revenue Intelligence Intelligence Bureau Joint Intelligence Committee National Technical Research Organisation Research and Analysis Wing Special Group Special Frontier Force Investigation agencies Central Bureau of Investigation Central Bureau of Narcotics Directorate General of Income Tax Investigation Enforcement Directorate Investigation Division of the Central Board of Direct Taxes Narcotics Control Bureau National Investigation Agency National Counter Terrorism Centre Wildlife Crime Control Bureau Police Police service Indian Police Service Delhi Uttar Pradesh Uttarakhand West Bengal Police ranks Commissioner Director general National Police Memorial Police brutality Police Complaints Authority Research and Training Bureau of Police Research and Development Indian Police Foundation and Institute Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy Central agencies Assam Rifles Border Security Force Central Armed Police Forces Central Industrial Security Force Central Reserve Police Force Commando Battalion for Resolute Action Rapid Action Force Government Railway Police Home Guard Indo-Tibetan Border Police National Security Guard Railway Protection Force Special Protection Group Sashastra Seema Bal Union territories Andaman and Nicobar Chandigarh Delhi Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu Jammu and Kashmir Ladakh Lakshadweep Puducherry States Andhra Pradesh Arunachal Pradesh Assam Bihar Chhattisgarh Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Sikkim Tamil Nadu Telangana Tripura Uttar Pradesh Uttarakhand West Bengal Armed and tactical units Anti-Terrorism Squad Counter Insurgency Force Eastern Frontier Rifles Force One Greyhounds Kerala Thunderbolts Mizoram Armed Police Punjab Police SWAT Team Special Operations Group (Jammu and Kashmir) Special Operation Group (Odisha) Special Tactical Unit Uttar Pradesh Provincial Armed Constabulary Uttarakhand Provincial Armed Constabulary Bar Bar Council Attorney General Solicitor General Additional Solicitor General Advocate General See also Emergency phone numbers 1-0-0 1-0-8 1-1-2 Indian Armed Forces Indian nationality law Judicial activism Number of police officers Pendency of court cases Uniform Civil Code Retrieved from "" https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=51_Special_Action_Group&oldid=1247968704 "" Categories : Special forces of India Specialist law enforcement agencies of India Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from December 2022 Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 September 2024, at 23:48 (UTC) . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Edit preview settings Search Search Toggle the table of contents 51 Special Action Group Add languages Add topic
