url,content
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_Protection_Group,"Special Protection Group - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Appearance move to sidebar hide Text Small Standard Large This page always uses small font size Width Standard Wide The content is as wide as possible for your browser window. Color (beta) Automatic Light Dark This page is always in light mode. Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Wikimania 2025 Program Proposals are now open! Click here to Apply Now This application is open until Monday 31st March, 2025 end of day [ Help with translations! ] Toggle the table of contents Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 2.1 Command and control 3 Current responsibilities 4 Equipment 5 Vehicles Toggle Vehicles subsection 5.1 Air transport 6 Contact with the media 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Special Protection Group 5 languages ગુજરાતી हिन्दी ಕನ್ನಡ മലയാളം தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Expand all Edit interlanguage links Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian Protective Service Agency Law enforcement agency Special Protection Group Viśeṣa Surakṣā Dala Emblem of the Special Protection Group Flag of the Special Protection Group Abbreviation SPG Motto Śauryam Samarpaṇam Surakṣaṇam Bravery, Dedication, Security Agency overview Formed 8 April 1985 ; 39 years ago ( 1985-04-08 ) Employees 3,000 active personnel [ 1 ] Annual budget ₹ 489 crore (US$56 million) (2025–26) [ 2 ] Jurisdictional structure Operations jurisdiction India (and abroad) Governing body Cabinet Secretariat Constituting instrument Special Protection Group Act, 1988 Operational structure Headquarters New Delhi Agency executives Hari Nath Mishra, IPS , Secretary (Security) Alok Sharma, IPS , Director, SPG Facilities Prime Minister's Vehicles Mercedes-Maybach S650 2 cars Range Rover Sentinel (2015) 4 cars Range Rover Sentinel (2019) 2 cars Toyota Fortuner (AN160) 30 cars Toyota Land Cruiser 8 cars BMW 760Li High Security 3 cars Website spg .nic .in The Special Protection Group ( SPG ) [ a ] is an agency under the Cabinet Secretariat of the Government of India , whose sole responsibility is protecting the prime minister of India and, in some cases, his or her family. It was formed in 1988 by an Act of the Parliament of India . [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The agency protects the prime minister at all times, both in India and abroad, as well as the prime minister's immediate family members. [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Family members, however, may decline security. Previously, the SPG's mandate included protecting the prime minister's ""parents, wife [ sic ] and children"" resident anywhere in India during their term of office and for five years after leaving office. However, the Special Protection Group (Amendment) Act, 2019 reduced such mandate. [ 7 ] Presently, Prime Minister Narendra Modi is the only SPG protectee . History [ edit ] Before 1981, the security of the prime minister at their official residence was the responsibility of the Special Security District of the Delhi Police , overseen by an officer of the rank of Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP). This model was adopted from the United Kingdom, where the prime minister of the United Kingdom is protected by London's Metropolitan Police Service . In October 1981, a Special Task Force (STF) was established by the Intelligence Bureau (IB) to provide transportation security and road escorts for prime minister during travels in and out of New Delhi . After the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi by two of her Delhi Police security personnel in October 1984, a review was undertaken by a Committee of Secretaries of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Given the breach, it was decided to entrust security of the prime minister to an exclusive unit under direct control of the STF to provide the prime minister with proximate security at all times. These decisions were initially taken as short-term measures. On 18 February 1985, the Ministry of Home Affairs set up the Birbal Nath Committee to examine the issue and submit recommendations to the government for prime ministerial security. In March 1985, the Committee submitted its recommendation for the raising of an independent agency for prime ministerial protection, known as the Special Protection Unit (SPU). On 30 March 1985, the President of India , by executive order, created 819 posts for the unit within the Cabinet Secretariat . The name of the unit was re-christened Special Protection Group, led by a Director who would be an Indian Police Service officer with the rank of Inspector General of Police . S. Subramaniam, then the Joint Director (VIP Security) in the Intelligence Bureau, assumed office as the first Director of the SPG. [ 8 ] Initially, the establishment of the SPG necessitated a new distribution of responsibility to various agencies concerned with the security of the prime minister. With 819 posts, the new agency lacked the manpower to provide complete protection to the prime minister's person, office, residence and dependents, and remained dependent on the Delhi Police and state police units for logistics and transportation. The Blue Book , an existing manual for the protection of the prime minister, was amended to incorporate new proximate security protocols. Under the new arrangements, on domestic visits, the Intelligence Bureau and concerned State Police were responsible for coordination, collection and dissemination of intelligence affecting the prime minister's security. State Police and the SPG would then provide physical security arrangements for the prime minister in two layers. The SPG operated under the authority of its constituting executive order for three years without legislation, from April 1985 to June 1988. That year, the Rajiv Gandhi Government passed the Special Protection Group Act to codify the order's provisions. At the time, the Act only permitted security for the prime minister and his immediate relatives. When Rajiv Gandhi left office in 1989, he ceased to receive SPG protection as Leader of the Opposition . This occurred despite the significant threat to his life following his government's military intervention in the Sri Lankan Civil War . In May 1991, Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated at a political rally in Tamil Nadu by a suicide bomber of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam , a Sri Lankan terrorist organization. After his assassination, the SPG Act was amended to provide SPG security to former prime ministers and their immediate families for a period of ten years after leaving office. [ 4 ] Prior to the end of this period, a security review would be conducted by the IB to determine a protectee's current threat and the need for extensions (which would last five years). For this reason, Gandhi's widow, Sonia Gandhi , and her children, Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi received SPG protection for 28 years (until 2019) owing to their political activity in the Indian National Congress . On 27 November 2019, the Parliament of India passed the Special Protection Group (Amendment Act), 2019 which limited SPG protection only to the PM and his immediate family members residing with him at his official residence. Under the amended legislation, former prime ministers are eligible for an extension of their protection for up to five years after leaving office, subject to a threat assessment by the Intelligence Bureau. [ 9 ] The bill was opposed by the Indian National Congress , fearing that the Gandhi Family would face a greater risk of violence without SPG protection. After its passage, these individuals, along with former prime minister Manmohan Singh , Heeraben Modi and Jashodaben Modi , the mother and estranged wife, respectively, of incumbent prime minister Narendra Modi , lost SPG protection. They were instead accorded different levels of security ranging from Z+ to Y by the Ministry of Home Affairs . The bill reduced the SPG's legal protectees to Modi, who lives alone at his official residence. Organization [ edit ] The Director is assisted by number of Deputy Directors, Assistant Directors, Joint Assistant Directors. [ 3 ] [ 10 ] The SPG is divided broadly into the following four categories: Operations: Performs actual protection duties. In the Operations Branch, there are sub-components such as the Communications Wing, Technical Wing and Transport Wing. Training: Trains new and existing personnel on a continuous basis. The SPG trains officers in physical efficiency, marksmanship , anti- sabotage checks, communication and other operative aspects connected with close protection drills and influencing security. The training programme is constantly reviewed and updated to effectively thwart threats from newer areas and in keeping with existing threat perception. Intelligence and Tours: Threat assessment , internal intelligence pertaining to personnel, verification of character and antecedents and other allied jobs. Administration: Deals with human resources, finance, procurement and other related matters. Command and control [ edit ] The ""general superintendence, direction and control"" of the SPG is exercised by the Government of India. [ 3 ] The head of the force, the Director, formally serves as the Secretary (Security) in the Cabinet Secretariat and is responsible for ""the command and supervision"" of the force. [ 3 ] The director of the SPG since its inception has been an officer of the Indian Police Service (IPS) and, today, holds the rank of Director General of Police. [ 10 ] The SPG does not directly recruit personnel. Recruits are instead drawn from enlisted ranks of the Central Armed Police Forces and Railway Protection Force . Personnel from these services may apply for deputation to the SPG and undergo rigorous physical and psychological assessments as well as enhanced security screening. Deputation to the SPG usually lasts five years, but may be extended at the Director's discretion. Officers of the SPG, responsible for leadership and coordination, are drawn from the IPS. Current responsibilities [ edit ] Narendra Modi , the incumbent prime minister of India , is currently the only person under SPG protection. Sonia Gandhi and her children, Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi were granted SPG protection for 28 years from 1991 to 2019. Two of their family members, then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and then former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi , were assassinated in 1984 and 1991, respectively, with the Government of India assessing a continued threat to their safety. On 8 November 2019, the Government of India withdrew their SPG security details and accorded them with Z+ Security . This decision followed the government's withdrawal of an SPG detail for Modi's predecessor, Manmohan Singh . Additionally, under terms of the Special Protection Group (Amendment) Act, 2019 , SPG security details for Modi's estranged wife, Jashodaben , and mother, Heeraben, were withdrawn that same year. The Act amended the SPG's legal mandate to protect the incumbent prime minister's ""parents, wife and children"" to ""immediate family members residing (with the Prime Minister) at his official residence."" [ 11 ] SPG protectees, by law, are exempt from personal security screening at all airports in India and may access VIP lounges at airports operated by the Airports Authority of India . Additionally, they are exempt from security screening when entering certain official buildings, including the prime minister's office and residence. Equipment [ edit ] Prime Minister Narendra Modi surrounded by SPG at Republic Day Parade 2018. Name Country of origin Type Users Glock 17 Austria Semi-automatic pistol Uniformed officers Glock 19 Five-seveN Belgium Special Intervention Unit (SIU) and uniformed officers [ 12 ] [ 13 ] FN P90 Submachine gun Uniformed officers Modern Sub Machine Carbine India Selected to be used by the SPG after trials in 2019 FN Herstal F2000 Belgium Assault rifle Special Intervention Unit (SIU) [ 12 ] FN SCAR Vehicles [ edit ] The prime minister's motorcade comprises a fleet of vehicles, the core of which consists of at least two Mercedes-Maybach S650 guards / Range Rovers , twelve Toyota Fortuners and a Mercedes-Benz Sprinter ambulance. A Toyota Fortuner Electronic Countermeasures car also accompanies the convoy, besides many more escort vehicles. Mercedes-Maybach S650 guard . The customized armoured vehicle has VR10 level of protection. For official movement, the Indian flag is fender-mounted on the driver's side of the vehicles, and if taken abroad, the flag of the foreign country is fender-mounted on the passenger's side. Range Rover (L405) Sentinel [ 14 ] These armoured variants of the standard wheelbase 2016 Range Rover Autobiography SUV are used as transportation of the prime minister. If not being used by the prime minister himself/herself, they are used to transport members of the prime minister's immediate family accompanying him/her as part of the motorcade. These SUVs are armoured by Land Rover's Special Vehicle Operations facility in Coventry , England , and are certified with VR8 in the BRV 2009 ballistics protection ratings. They can withstand some of the most damaging and targeted of threats, including penetration by 7.62mm high velocity armour piercing incendiary bullets, they can protect occupants against up to 15 kg lateral Trinitrotoluene (TNT) blasts and defend against DM51 grenade explosions from both beneath the floor and above the sunroof. Run-flat tyres allow the vehicle to be driven even if the tyres are deflated. The chassis is reinforced with super-high-strength steel, and the standard glass has been replaced by multi-laminated armoured privacy glass of optical quality. The suspension is upgraded as compared to the standard Range Rover, while an anti-tamper exhaust, self-sealing fuel tank, auxiliary back-up battery and split-charging battery system provide added protection and security. For official movement, the Indian flag is fender-mounted on the driver's side of the vehicles, and if taken abroad, the flag of the foreign country is fender-mounted on the passenger's side. Toyota Fortuner (AN160) These SUVs carry the SPG Special Agents and Uniformed Officers assigned to the Prime Ministerial Security Detail. 8 Fortuners accompany the motorcade at all times. The protection levels on the Toyota SUVs are undisclosed. Mercedes-Benz Sprinter These are armoured tactical medical support vehicles to the prime minister, at least two of which are always spotted to the rear of the motorcade. They carry at least a litre of the prime minister's blood type, for emergency transfusions. Toyota Fortuner Electronic Countermeasures Vehicle This vehicle is used to counter guided attacks, such as IEDs , Rocket Propelled Grenades, and Anti-Tank Guided Missiles. The antennas mounted on the roof are used in barrage jamming applications and for scouting purposes, the primary method used to counter IED threats. The antenna configuration can be changed according to threat level, for instance, taller antennas are used to increase the jamming protection distance, or change jamming frequency ranges. There are two dome-shaped EW Sensors. The EW sensors are millimetre-wave radars used to detect the launch of an RPG (Rocket Propelled Grenades) or laser range finder illumination and launch of an Anti-Tank Guided Missile (ATGM). Air transport [ edit ] Indian Air Force One: Air India One, also referred to as AI1, is the call sign of any aircraft carrying the president of India, vice president of India or the prime minister of India. These flights are operated as VIP flights by the Indian Air Force (IAF) . Previously, one of two modified Boeing 747-400 passenger aircraft, used otherwise for normal service, would be utilized for the prime minister's overseas travel. However, in 2020, these were replaced with two customized Boeing 777-300ER aircraft with distinct national markings – built in the United States along the lines of Air Force One . Additionally, for domestic flights, the IAF currently owns four 14-seater Embraer-135 aircraft and three customized 46-seater Boeing Business Jet (BBJ) 737s that have a VIP cabin. PM Narendra Modi once used an Indian Air Force Lockheed C-130J during his visit to Sri Lanka. Air India One Boeing 777 Mi-17 helicopters: The Defence Ministry has approved the ""conversion"" of six new Mi-17 V5s to replace the old Mi-8 helicopters with IAF's elite Communications Squadron to ferry the president and prime minister. Mi-17 V5s have advanced avionics, on-board navigation systems and night-vision devices. The SPG wanted the helicopters to have ""high tail booms"" to allow cars to come right next to the rear exit staircase without ""exposing"" passengers to a threat from anyone in the vicinity, additional transit range, better crashworthiness and armour protection. Contact with the media [ edit ] Members of the SPG are barred by the SPG Act from contact with the media or from publishing or collaborating in the publication of ""any book, letter or other document"" related to their work, including upon retirement from government service. [ 3 ] The SPG and its personnel are exempt from any information disclosure requests under the Right to Information Act, 2005 . See also [ edit ] Parliament Security Services President's Bodyguard Special Forces of India National Security Guard Notes [ edit ] ^ ISO : Viśeṣa Surakṣā Dala References [ edit ] ^ (IISS), International Institute for Strategic Studies (2017). The Military Balance 2017 . Routledge. ISBN 9781857439007 . Archived from the original on 9 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 November 2020 . ^ ""DEMAND NO. 51, Demands for Grants, 2025-2026, MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS"" (PDF) . IndiaBudget.gov.in . New Delhi . 1 February 2025. p. 5 . Retrieved 1 February 2025 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Jump up to: a b c d e The Gazette of India (7 June 1988). ""THE SPECIAL PROTECTION GROUP ACT 1988 [AS AMENDED IN 1991, 1994 & 1999]"" . No. 30 . New Delhi: The Government of India. Archived from the original on 20 October 2014 . Retrieved 22 May 2014 . ^ Jump up to: a b ""Mayawati not entitled to SPG cover under law"" . The Times of India . Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. ^ ""Govt. ends SPG protection for Sonia, Rahul & Priyanka"" . The Hindu . 9 November 2019. Archived from the original on 12 November 2019 . Retrieved 9 November 2019 . ^ ""SPG amendment bill passed in Lok Sabha"" . The Economic Times . 27 November 2019. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 27 November 2019 . ^ ""What is the Special Protection Group and why Manmohan Singh's security cover was removed"" . The Print . 26 August 2019. Archived from the original on 9 November 2019 . Retrieved 9 November 2019 . ^ ""About Us :: SPG, Govt. of India"" . www.spg.nic.in . Archived from the original on 27 May 2019 . Retrieved 27 May 2019 . ^ ""English Releases"" . pibarchive.nic.in . Archived from the original on 28 November 2019 . Retrieved 28 November 2019 . ^ Jump up to: a b ""Prasad's appointment as SPG chief stuns many"" . Times of India . 3 November 2011. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 23 May 2014 . ^ ""Archived copy"" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 May 2021 . Retrieved 17 May 2021 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Jump up to: a b Unnithan, Sandeep (22 August 2008). ""If looks could kill"" . India Today. Archived from the original on 15 August 2009 . Retrieved 4 April 2009 . ^ Unnithan, Sandeep (1 September 2005). ""SPG Gets More Teeth"". India Today (ISSN 0254-8399). ^ ""Range Rover Sentinel"" . Archived from the original on 21 April 2019 . Retrieved 6 September 2024 . External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Special Protection Group . SPG. ""Special Protection Group"" . : Official Website of SPG SPG Act :: SPG, Govt. of India Gazette notification of Special Protection Group Act Latest News, Breaking News Today - Entertainment, Cricket, Business, Politics - IndiaToday new wing of SPG. show v t e Law enforcement in India Law of India Constitution Amendments Basic structure Directive Principles Fundamental Duties Fundamental Rights Judicial Review Criminal Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam Capital Punishment Cognisable offence Civil and Personal Code of Civil Procedure Modern Hindu law Christian Personal law Muslim Personal Law Historic Code of Criminal Procedure Hindu Personal Law History of Indian law Indian Penal Code Judiciary Supreme Court Chief Justice Judges High Courts Chief Justices Judges District Courts Chief Judicial Magistrate Court District Munsiff Court Subordinate Courts Gram Nyayalayas Lok Adalat Tribunals Ministries & departments Central Law Commission Ministry of Home Affairs Ministry of Law and Justice States Bihar Kerala Maharashtra Tamil Nadu Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Crimes Against children Against women Caste related Corruption Human rights Mass surveillance Rape Suicide Organised Drugs Black money Hawala Paid media Scandals Terrorism Records and tracking National Crime Records Bureau Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems Intelligence agencies Bureau of Police Research and Development Directorate of Revenue Intelligence Intelligence Bureau Joint Intelligence Committee National Technical Research Organisation Research and Analysis Wing Special Group Special Frontier Force Investigation agencies Central Bureau of Investigation Central Bureau of Narcotics Directorate General of Income Tax Investigation Enforcement Directorate Investigation Division of the Central Board of Direct Taxes Narcotics Control Bureau National Investigation Agency National Counter Terrorism Centre Wildlife Crime Control Bureau Police Police service Indian Police Service Delhi Uttar Pradesh Uttarakhand West Bengal Police ranks Commissioner Director general National Police Memorial Police brutality Police Complaints Authority Research and Training Bureau of Police Research and Development Indian Police Foundation and Institute Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy Central agencies Assam Rifles Border Security Force Central Armed Police Forces Central Industrial Security Force Central Reserve Police Force Commando Battalion for Resolute Action Rapid Action Force Government Railway Police Home Guard Indo-Tibetan Border Police National Security Guard Railway Protection Force Special Protection Group Sashastra Seema Bal Union territories Andaman and Nicobar Chandigarh Delhi Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu Jammu and Kashmir Ladakh Lakshadweep Puducherry States Andhra Pradesh Arunachal Pradesh Assam Bihar Chhattisgarh Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Sikkim Tamil Nadu Telangana Tripura Uttar Pradesh Uttarakhand West Bengal Armed and tactical units Anti-Terrorism Squad Counter Insurgency Force Eastern Frontier Rifles Force One Greyhounds Kerala Thunderbolts Mizoram Armed Police Punjab Police SWAT Team Special Operations Group (Jammu and Kashmir) Special Operation Group (Odisha) Special Tactical Unit Uttar Pradesh Provincial Armed Constabulary Uttarakhand Provincial Armed Constabulary Bar Bar Council Attorney General Solicitor General Additional Solicitor General Advocate General See also Emergency phone numbers 1-0-0 1-0-8 1-1-2 Indian Armed Forces Indian nationality law Judicial activism Number of police officers Pendency of court cases Uniform Civil Code show v t e Indian Railways Authority Ministry of Railways Rail Bhavan Railway Board Related organisations Central Organisation for Modernisation of Workshops (COFMOW) Central Organisation for Railway Electrification (CORE) Centre for Railway Information Systems (CRIS) Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) Container Corporation of India (CCI) Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India (DFCCIL) High Speed Rail Corporation of India Limited (HSRI) Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) Indian Railway Finance Corporation (IRFC) Indian Railway Stations Development Corporation (IRSDC) Ircon International (IRCON) Konkan Railway Corporation (KRC) Mumbai Railway Vikas Corporation (MRVC) National High Speed Rail Corporation Limited (NHSRCL) Passenger Amenities Committee (PAC) Rail India Technical and Economic Service (RITES) Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) Rail Vikas Nigam (RVNL) RailTel Railway Protection Force (RPF) Railway Recruitment Control Board (RRCB) Railways Sports Promotion Board (RSPB) Research Design and Standards Organisation (RDSO) Zones Central East Central East Coast Eastern Kolkata Metro North Central North Eastern North Western Northeast Frontier Northern South Central South Coast South East Central South Eastern South Western Southern West Central Western Rolling stock Coaching Stock ICF coach LHB coach Tejas coach Trainsets Amrit Bharat Multiple units Shinkansen Vande Bharat Vande Bharat Sleeper Locomotives Wagon Numbering Manufacturing units Banaras Locomotive Works BEML Limited Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited Bharat Wagon and Engineering Braithwaite & Co. Burn Standard Company Chittaranjan Locomotive Works Diesel Locomotive Factory Electric Locomotive Factory Integral Coach Factory Marathwada Rail Coach Factory Modern Coach Factory Patiala Locomotive Works Rail Coach Factory (Kapurthala) Rail Coach Factory (Sonipat) Rail Wheel Factory Rail Wheel Plant Titagarh Wagons Railway depots Diesel Loco Abu Road Alambagh Andal Bandra Bardhaman Bhagat Ki Kothi Bokaro Steel City Bondamunda Coonoor Ernakulam Erode Gandhidham Golden Rock Gonda Gooty Guntakal Howrah Hubli Itarsi Izzatnagar Jamalpur Jhansi Kalka Kalyan Kazipet Kharagpur Krishnarajapuram Kurla Ludhiana Lumding Malda Town Maula Ali Mhow Motibagh Mughalsarai New Guwahati City New Katani Patratu Pratapnagar Pune Raipur Ratlam Sabarmati Samastipur Shakurbasti Siliguri Tondiarpet Tughlakabad Vatva Vijayawada Visakhapatnam Electric Loco Ajni Angul Arakkonam Asansol Barauni Bhilai Bhusawal Bilaspur Bokaro Steel City Bondamunda Erode Ghaziabad Gomoh Gorakhpur Guntakal Howrah Ispat Nagar Itarsi Jhansi Kalyan Kanpur Katni Kazipet Khanalampura Lallaguda Ludhiana Mughalsarai Nagpur Rourkela Royapuram Saharanpur Saiyedpur Bhitri Tatanagar Tughlakabad Vadodara Valsad Vijayawada Visakhapatnam Steam Loco Coonoor Rewari Multiple Unit DEMU/DMU Bangalore Budgam Gondia Jalandhar Jamalpur Motibagh Maula Ali Shakurbasti Vijayawada EMU Avadi Bandel Barasat Ghaziabad Howrah Kalwa Kandivali Kharagpur Kurla Maula Ali Mumbai Central Narkeldanga Panskura Ranaghat Saharanpur Sanpada Sonarpur Tambaram Tikiapara Velachery Virar MEMU Asansol Bhilai Kanpur Kollam Palakkad Rajahmundry Vadodara Kolkata Metro Noapara Tollygunge New Garia Central Park Joka Lines Main Chennai–Bangalore Howrah–Prayagraj–Mumbai Howrah–Nagpur–Mumbai Howrah–Chennai Howrah–Delhi Howrah–Gaya–Delhi Mumbai–Chennai New Delhi–Chennai New Delhi–Mumbai High-speed Mumbai–Ahmedabad (Under construction) Suburban Chennai MRTS Chennai Suburban Delhi Suburban Pune Suburban Hyderabad MMTS Kolkata Suburban Mumbai Suburban Mountain Darjeeling Kalka-Shimla Nilgiri Passenger trains Semi-High speed Amrit Bharat Express Duronto Express Gatimaan Express Tejas Express Rajdhani Express Shatabdi Express Vande Bharat Express Premium AC Express AC Double Decker Express Humsafar Express Uday Express Express Antyodaya Express Garib Rath Express Intercity Express Jan Sadharan Express Jan Shatabdi Express Mahamana Express Sampark Kranti Express Suvidha Express Rajya Rani Express Vivek Express Yuva Express Luxury Deccan Odyssey Fairy Queen Golden Chariot Mahaparinirvan Express Maharajas' Express Palace on Wheels Ramayana Express Royal Orient Royal Rajasthan on Wheels Village on Wheels Special Lifeline Express Red Ribbon Express Science Express Others Passenger trains Namo Bharat Rapid Rail Stations Major Chennai Chennai Central Chennai Egmore Tambaram Delhi Delhi Jn. Hazrat Nizamuddin New Delhi Kolkata Howrah Howrah South Sealdah Mumbai Dadar Kalyan Jn. Mumbai Central Mumbai CSMT Mumbai LTT Panvel Others Ahmedabad Jn. Gorakhpur Jn. KSR Bengaluru Patna Jn. Pune Jn. Secunderabad Jn. Surat Thane Vijayawada Jn. Visakhapatnam Jn. Others Junctions Metro Training institutes Indian Railways Institute of Civil Engineering (IRICEN) Indian Railways Institute of Electrical Engineering (IRICEE) Indian Railways Institute of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering (IRIMEE) Indian Railways Institute of Signal Engineering and Telecommunications (IRISET) Indian Railways Track Machine Training Centre (IRTMTC) National Academy of Indian Railways (NAIR) National Rail and Transportation Institute (NRTI) Jagjivan Ram Railway Protection Force Academy (JRRPFA) Trade unions All India Railwaymen's Federation (AIRF) All India Station Masters' Association (AISMA) Konkan Railway Corporation Employees Union (KRCEU) Related articles Accidents Anti-collision device Kavach Future Diamond Quadrilateral History of Rail Transport Last vehicle board Railway budget Railway schools Train Warning System Urban Rail Transit Category [2025] spg suvankar dolai Retrieved from "" https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Special_Protection_Group&oldid=1279551506 "" Categories : Special forces of India Protective security units 1985 establishments in India Military units and formations established in 1985 Hidden categories: CS1 maint: url-status CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2021 Use Indian English from September 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 March 2025, at 05:50 (UTC) . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Edit preview settings Search Search Toggle the table of contents Special Protection Group 5 languages Add topic"
