url,content
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_Frontier_Force,"Special Frontier Force - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Appearance move to sidebar hide Text Small Standard Large This page always uses small font size Width Standard Wide The content is as wide as possible for your browser window. Color (beta) Automatic Light Dark This page is always in light mode. Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Wikimania 2025 Program Proposals are now open! Click here to Apply Now This application is open until Monday 31st March, 2025 end of day [ Help with translations! ] Toggle the table of contents Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 British India precursor 1.2 1950s training with IB and CIA 1.3 Formation 1.4 CIA support and pull-out 2 Battalions and composition 3 Ranks 4 Operations Toggle Operations subsection 4.1 Pakistan 4.1.1 Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 4.1.2 Kargil War 4.2 China 4.2.1 Cold War 4.2.2 2020–2021 China–India skirmishes 5 See also 6 References Special Frontier Force 7 languages বাংলা Français हिन्दी Italiano Svenska தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Expand all Edit interlanguage links Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Special covert unit of Indian armed forces Special Frontier Force Insignia of the Special Frontier Force Founded 14 November 1962 Country India Type Special Forces Airborne Infantry Size Classified Part of Cabinet Secretariat [ 1 ] Headquarters Chakrata , Uttarakhand , India Nickname(s) Establishment 22, ""Phantoms of Chittagong"" Engagements Bangladesh Liberation War Operation Blue Star Operation Meghdoot Operation Cactus Operation Pawan Kargil War Operation Rakshak 2020–2021 China–India skirmishes Commanders Notable commanders Maj.Gen Sujan Singh Uban Insignia Badge Aircraft flown Helicopter HAL Cheetah HAL Lancer Cargo helicopter Mi-17V-5 Utility helicopter HAL Dhruv HAL Chetak Reconnaissance IAI Searcher II IAI Heron DRDO Rustom Transport Gulfstream III Gulfstream G100 Military unit The Special Frontier Force ( SFF ) is a paramilitary Indian special forces unit composed primarily of Tibetan refugees and Gurkhas in India. It was established after the Sino-Indian War of 1962 to primarily conduct covert operations behind the Chinese lines in case of another war with China. Later it increased in size and scope of operations. [ 2 ] Throughout its history, SFF has fought in India's major external wars including the Bangladesh Liberation War and the Kargil War . It has also been involved in internal security, including Operation Blue Star and also serving as the ""Personal Force"" of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi to suppress opposition parties during the state of emergency from 1975 to 1977. [ 3 ] It has been part of border operations against China, including the 2020–2021 China–India skirmishes . [ 2 ] Based in Chakrata , [ 4 ] Uttarakhand, the force was put under the direct supervision of the Intelligence Bureau (IB), and later the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW), India's external intelligence agency , [ 5 ] and is not part of the Indian Army but functions under their operational control with its own rank structure, charter and training infrastructure. [ 6 ] It falls under the authority of the Directorate General on Security in the Cabinet Secretariat headed by an Inspector General (SFF) who is selected from the Major General rank of the Indian Army and who reports directly to the Prime Minister's Office . [ 1 ] History [ edit ] British India precursor [ edit ] Tibetans have been a part of the modern Indian Army for as long as it has existed. During the time of the Great Game , the British Indian Army began to employ Tibetans as spies, intelligence agents, and even covert militia in North India and Tibet proper. [ citation needed ] 1950s training with IB and CIA [ edit ] At the time of Indian independence , the northern mountain-covered region of India remained the most isolated and strategically overlooked territory of the subcontinent. During the 1950s, the American Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the Indian Intelligence Bureau (IB) established Mustang Base in Mustang in Nepal, [ 7 ] which trained Tibetans in guerilla warfare . The Mustang rebels brought the 14th Dalai Lama to India during the 1959 Tibetan Rebellion . Former CIA officer John Kennet Knaus who worked in Tibet credited IB Chief Bhola Nath Mullik for SFF formation. According to A Tom Grunfeld, Professor of History at State University of New York , 12,000 Tibetans were trained by United States Army Special Forces and partly funded by Federal government of the United States . Although neither US nor Central Tibetan Administration has any influence on SFF. [ 6 ] Most of the Tibetans recruited were also trained secretly in Okinawa in Kadena Air Base. [ 8 ] Formation [ edit ] Chakrata, Uttarakhand, is where SFF personnel are trained in stealth combat and scouting techniques. The idea of raising a specialized force consisting of Tibetan refugees and Tibetan resistance fighters in India against the Chinese was first mooted by General K S Thimayya when he was leading the Indian Army between May 1957 and May 1961. [ 9 ] During the Sino-Indian War and towards the end of 1962, after hectic lobbying by the IB Chief Bhola Nath Mullik and World War II veteran Biju Patnaik , [ 10 ] the Jawaharlal Nehru government ordered the raising of an elite commando unit and specialised mountain division. [ 1 ] The primary task of SFF is defence against the People's Liberation Army (PLA) Ground Force as well as conducting clandestine intelligence gathering and commando operations along the Chinese border. Chushi Gangdruk leaders were contacted for recruitment of Khampas into this new unit. The initial strength was 5000 men, mostly Khampas who were recruited at its new Mountain Training Facility at Chakrata , 100 km from the city of Dehradun . [ 11 ] Initially known as Establishment 22 within the military and intelligence community due to its first Inspector General, Maj. Gen. Sujan Singh Uban , who commanded the 22nd Mountain Regiment of the Royal Indian Artillery during World War II . [ 10 ] [ 12 ] Uban also went on to command a Long Range Desert Group Squadron (LRDS) in North Africa during the war. [ 13 ] The SFF made its home base at Chakrata, a mountain town in the foothills of the Himalayas home to a large Tibetan refugee population. Starting with a force of 5,000 men, the SFF commenced six months of training in rock climbing and guerrilla warfare . Initial training was conducted by the Intelligence Bureau Special Operations Unit. Both R&AW and the CIA helped in raising the force. During the same period, the Indian government also formed the Ladakh Scouts and the Nubra Guards paramilitary forces on similar lines. Many SFF members were also absorbed from the Gurkha Rifles. SFF was later incorporated into the Special Services Bureau . By late 1963, inter-service rivalry led to severe criticism by the Indian Army. To prove the SFF's worth, the Inspector General sent 120 men from the SFF on a field exercise, codenamed Garuda , with the Army. The exercise proved to be a dramatic success for the SFF and the Army was now less inclined to criticise the force. [ 14 ] However the force faced other problems such as mass desertions by Tibetans. The Tibetan recruits found that smuggling was a much easier way of making money than risking their lives along the border. [ 3 ] In 1964, the SFF, led by the Inspector General, began its airborne training at Agra. The SFF then began its own airborne training program at Sarsawa Air Force Station . In 1967, Establishment 22 was expanded and renamed into Special Frontier Force . [ 15 ] In 1968 with the help of Aviation Research Centre (ARC), SFF were provided with airlift facilities and became fully airborne-qualified with a dedicated mountain and jungle warfare unit. CIA support and pull-out [ edit ] The SFF's weapons were all provided by the US and consisted mainly of M-1, M-2 and M-3 sub-machine guns. Heavy weapons were not provided. [ 16 ] The US government pulled out the CIA from the training program as relations with India soured in the early 1970s during the period of Cold War , with the Sino-Soviet split and Richard Nixon's 1972 visit to China for improving the bilateral relationship. [ 17 ] The unit conducted limited cross-border reconnaissance missions as well as highly classified joint operations with the CIA in 1965 on Mount Nanda Devi in the Himalayas. [ 16 ] Battalions and composition [ edit ] The SFF has a total of six battalions called 1 Vikas, 2 Vikas, 3 Vikas, 5 Vikas, 6 Vikas, and 7 Vikas. Each battalion has around 800 troopers. [ 18 ] The six battalions are commanded by Indian Army officers of colonel rank. At least five other Indian Army officers are in a battalion. [ 18 ] At the helm of SFF is the Inspector General (SFF), an officer of Major General rank. The Special Group , or 4 Vikas, functions under a separate chain of command under the R&AW. [ 18 ] Historically, by the late 1960s, the SFF was organised into six battalions for administrative purposes. In the past, each battalion, consisting of six companies, was commanded by a Tibetan who had a rank equivalent to a lieutenant colonel in the Indian Army. A Tibetan major or captain commanded each company, which was the primary unit used in operations. [ 16 ] After the 1980s, the practice of giving Indian Army commissions to Tibetans was discontinued. [ 18 ] Ethnically, the unit is a mixture of Tibetans and Gurkhas from Nepal. [ 19 ] The Tibetan troopers are recruited from the dwindling population of Tibetans in India, which stood at 85,000 in 2018. [ 20 ] The flow of Tibetans joining SFF has slowed due to the declining population of Tibetans, leading to a more ethnically mixed unit. [ 20 ] [ 19 ] Gurkhas have been recruited to the SFF since 1965. [ 21 ] Tibetans currently serve as soldiers and non-commissioned officers and were in the past given officer commissions. [ 18 ] Women are also recruited for specialized operations as well as in signal and medical companies. [ 16 ] [ 22 ] Ranks [ edit ] The Special Frontier Force retains a military rank insignia system distinct from other Indian paramilitary organizations. Officers Rank group General / flag officers Senior officers Junior officers Special Frontier Force v t e Brigadier Colonel Lieutenant colonel Major Captain First Lieutenant Second Lieutenant Personnel below officers rank Rank group Subordinate Officers (SO) Non commissioned officers (NCO) Constables Special Frontier Force v t e No insignia Subedar Major Subedar Naib Subedar Havildar Naik Lance Naik Sepoy Operations [ edit ] SFF was raised with covert operations in mind, mainly along the Indo-China border; however, SFF has been fielded by the R&AW and the Indian government in various covert and overt operation theatres. [ 16 ] Deputy leader Tenzin Norbu was posthumously honored by 119 Infantry Battalion of Territorial Army from Assam Regiment and awarded a memento from the Government of India, signed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi for his service at Siachen glacier. [ 23 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 [ edit ] Main article: Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 Illustration showing military units and troop movements during the war SFF was part of major combat operations during the Bangladesh Liberation War . In April 1971, Eastern Command initiated Operation Instruction 52 . SFF was tasked to conduct unconventional warfare , rally the people of East Pakistan in support of the liberation movement and damage the logistics capability of Pakistan Army . [ 24 ] From late October to November 1971, elements of the force were sent to Mizoram . Around 3,000 members from SFF Task Force was deployed to conduct pre-emptive strike to support the Indian Army formations along the Chittagong Hill Tracts and to train the local underground unit called Mujib Bahini . [ 25 ] [ 6 ] With cross-border attacks becoming more frequent, SFF was ordered to attack the Chittagong Hill Tracts. The Bangladeshi campaign was designated Operation Mountain Eagle , [ 11 ] and SFF members were given Bulgarian AK-47s and US-made carbines . This operation saw the first Dapon, the Tibetan equivalent of a Brigadier, in command of part of the SFF Task Force. With war imminent, SFF successfully executed several mission plans that included the destruction of the Kaptai Dam and other bridges of strategic value. The Inspector General also urged that the SFF be used to capture the second largest city, Chittagong , but the idea found no support among military planners in New Delhi since the unit lacked artillery support and airlift capabilities to conduct a mission of such magnitude. After three weeks of border fighting, the SFF divided its six battalions into three columns and moved into East Pakistan on 3 December 1971. The Tibetans were given mortars and recoilless rifles and two Mil Mi-4 helicopters of the Indian Air Force , and captured several villages in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. The air-operations were handled by Aviation Research Centre (ARC) at Balasore . On the night of 14 November 1971 in the forests of Chittagong Hill Tracts, Brigadier Dhondup Gyatotsang during Operation Mountain Eagle was killed in a firefight with Special Service Group of the Pakistan Army . With the fall of Dhaka and Lieutenant General A.A.K. Niazi surrendering on 16 December 1971, [ 26 ] SFF had lost 49 men [ 27 ] and nearly 190 were wounded. [ 28 ] The SFF later joined with Seaborne Expedition Task Force consisting of 2nd Artillery Brigade , 1st Battalion 3rd Gorkha Rifles , 11 Battalion Bihar Regiment that was able to block potential escape route for East Pakistani forces into Burma . They also halted members of Pakistan's 97th Independent Brigade and 2nd Commando Battalion at the Chittagong Hill Tracts. For their bravery and courage, 580 SFF Task Force members were awarded cash prizes by the Union Government of India . Their swift covert capabilities won the force the nickname Phantoms of Chittagong . [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Kargil War [ edit ] Main article: Kargil War SFF participated in Kargil War for which the unit had received letter of commendation from Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee . [ 15 ] China [ edit ] Cold War [ edit ] Main article: Cold_War § From_confrontation_to_détente_(1962–1979) In 2004/08/07, intelligence reports kept indicating that China was preparing to test a nuclear weapon at its Lop Nor nuclear installation in Xinjiang . On 16 October 1964 China did indeed test a nuclear weapon in Xinjiang. It was expected, but not enough details were known. Later in November 1964, the CIA launched a U2 flight out of Aviation Research Centre (ARC)'s Charbatia Air Base in Orissa, but its return turned out to be something of a mishap. [ 31 ] [ 32 ] The Lockheed U-2 overshot the runway and got stuck in slushy ground caused by heavy rain in the monsoon . Getting it unstuck and out of India without being noticed by the Indian press, then even more subject to leftist influences and hence antagonistic to the US, was another clandestine operation. This gave all concerned quite a scare and it was decided to rely on other technical means. The CIA therefore decided to launch an electronic intelligence (ELINT) operation along with R&AW and to track China's nuclear tests and monitor its missile launches. The operation, in the garb of a mountaineering expedition to Nanda Devi , involved celebrated Indian climber M S Kohli who, along with operatives of SFF and CIA (most notably Jim Rhyne, a veteran STOL pilot), was to emplace a permanent ELINT device, a transceiver powered by a plutonium battery , that could detect and report data on future nuclear tests carried out by China. The plan to install a snooping device was devised far away in Washington, D.C. , in the offices of the National Geographic Society . Barry Bishop , a photographer with the magazine, interested General Curtis LeMay of the United States Air Force in the idea. [ 33 ] [ 34 ] The actual efforts called for the placement of a permanent ELINT device powered by a nuclear SNAP 19C power pack fuel cell. The first attempt to place this device on Nanda Devi, by a Kohli-led SFF team under the cover of a mountaineering expedition, failed as the team had to retreat in the face of adverse conditions and left the device in a small unmarked mountain cave after having hauled the device just short of the 25,645-foot peak. When another Kohli-led expedition returned the following year to recover the device, it was found to be missing. [ 31 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] In the meantime the Chinese not only kept testing not only nuclear weapons but also ballistic missiles at regular intervals. The urgency to gather information was never greater. Another mission was launched in 1967 to place a similar device on the Nanda Kot . This mission was successful but a couple of years later another problem cropped up: snow would pile up over the antenna and render it blind. So Kohli and a SFF team were sent once again to bring it down; this time they retrieved it successfully. In October 1967 the Chinese began testing an ICBM capable of reaching targets 6000 miles away. There was renewed urgency to find out more. So SFF mountaineers went off on one more mission in December 1969 to successfully place a gas-powered device on an undisclosed mountain, supposedly in Chinese-controlled areas. However, by the following year, the US had the first generation of TRW reconnaissance satellites under Defense Support Program in place and did not have to rely on the old ELINT devices. [ 37 ] 2020–2021 China–India skirmishes [ edit ] Main article: 2020–2021 China–India skirmishes During conflict with troops from PLA Western Theater Command Ground Force , Indian Army Northern Command initiated Operation Snow Leopard . [ 38 ] [ 39 ] SFF which formed the core team, was reported to have conducted joint operation with Indian Army around Gurung Hill , Rezang La including the capture of heights in South Pangong Tso range. [ 40 ] [ 41 ] In another incident, an official statement by the Indian Army read: ""Indian troops pre-empted this PLA activity on the southern bank of Pangong Tso , undertook measures to strengthen our positions and thwart Chinese intentions to unilaterally change facts on ground"". [ 42 ] During this operation, on 1 September 2020, company leader Nyima Tenzin died in a landmine blast while undertaking a reconnaissance mission along the line of actual control. [ 43 ] On 26 January 2021, Tsering Norbu was awarded ""Mention in dispatches"" for his contribution and successful execution of Operation Snow Leopard. [ 39 ] See also [ edit ] Special Forces of India References [ edit ] ^ Jump up to: a b c Chhina, Man Aman Singh; Kaushik, Krishn (2 September 2020). ""Explained: What is the Special Frontier Force, referred to as Vikas Battalion?"" . The Indian Express . Retrieved 2 September 2020 . ^ Jump up to: a b Shukla, Ajai (2 September 2020). ""Ladakh intrusions: Special Frontier Force takes first casualties"" . Business Standard . India . Retrieved 24 September 2020 . ^ Jump up to: a b Bobb, Dilip (15 December 1980). ""Special Frontier Force: More of a white elephant than an effective intelligence outfit?"" . India Today . Retrieved 24 September 2020 . ^ ""Establishment 22"" . chushigangdruk.org. 17 December 1971. Archived from the original on 6 July 2015 . Retrieved 28 September 2012 . ^ ""Bollywood Sargam – Special: Tibetan faujis in Bluestar"" . Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. ^ Jump up to: a b c Chhina, Man Aman Singh; Kaushik, Krishn (1 September 2020). ""Special Frontier Force: Why is a covert group now under the spotlight?"" . The Indian Express . Retrieved 14 November 2022 . ^ Arpi, Claude (8 January 2003). ""The Phantoms of Chittagong"" . Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 10 February 2003. ^ ""【重要】実はすごいインドの対外情報機関の力 欧米、中国、中東と世界各国に与える影響、日本人に与える教訓とは"" (in Japanese). ^ Thimayya, K.S. (1 January 1963). ""Chinese Aggression and After"" . International Studies . 5 ( 1– 2): 50– 53. doi : 10.1177/002088176300500105 . ISSN 0020-8817 . S2CID 155069361 . ^ Jump up to: a b Sanyal, Amitava (14 November 2009). ""The curious case of establishment 22"" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 17 November 2009 . Retrieved 29 May 2013 . ^ Jump up to: a b Chauhan, Bala (4 September 2020). ""Establishment-22 draws its strength from Karnataka"" . The New Indian Express . Retrieved 4 September 2020 . ^ Dubey, Ravi (3 September 2020). ""DNA Special: How India's Special Frontier Force is nightmare for China"" . Daily News and Analysis . Retrieved 4 September 2020 . ^ Uban, Gurdip Singh (20 September 2020). ""On The Roof of the World, The Shadow of the Celestial Snow Lion"" . Outlook . New Delhi . Retrieved 24 September 2020 . ^ Shulkla, Ajai (9 September 2020). ""Special Frontier Force: India's secret weapon against PLA"" . Rediff.com . Retrieved 24 September 2020 . ^ Jump up to: a b Krishnan, Ananth (6 September 2020). ""Special Frontier Force | Blooded in battle and fighting in the shadows"" . The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 14 November 2022 . ^ Jump up to: a b c d e ""Land Forces Site – SFF"" . Bharat Rakshak . Retrieved 12 August 2013 . ^ ""The Special Frontier Force: Tibetan refugees, once trained with US help"" . The Week . Retrieved 4 September 2020 . ^ Jump up to: a b c d e Unnithan, Sandeep (5 September 2020). ""The Tibetan ghost warriors"" . India Today . Retrieved 6 September 2020 . ^ Jump up to: a b ""Special Frontier Force: why is a covert group under the spotlight now?"" . The Indian Express . 8 September 2020. ^ Jump up to: a b ""Latest India-China border clash turns spotlight on Tibetan refugees in Special Frontier Force"" . South China Morning Post . 4 September 2020. ^ ""Centre says it's ready to restore service pension of special force veterans"" . The Hindustan Times . 22 June 2016. ^ Dutta, Amrita Nayak (6 September 2020). ""All about Special Frontier Force, the secretive Indian unit in news after Ladakh clash"" . ThePrint . Retrieved 14 November 2022 . ^ Lhamo, Choekyi (22 February 2022). ""SFF Leader Tenzin Norbu honoured posthumously by Indian govt"" . Phayul . Retrieved 14 November 2022 . ^ Swami, Praveen (25 December 2011). ""India's secret war in Bangladesh"" . The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 14 November 2022 . ^ Bangladesh. Mantrī Parishada Bibhāga. Bāṃlādeśa Muktiyuddha Sammānanā : Muktiyuddha Maitrī Sammānanā = Bangladesh Liberation War Honour: Friends of Liberation War Honour . OCLC 841212999 . ^ Josy, Joseph (6 November 2011). ""US forces had orders to target Indian Army in 1971"" . The Times of India . Retrieved 30 October 2022 . ^ Arpi, Claude (26 December 2006). ""1971 War: How the US tried to corner India"" . Rediff.com . Retrieved 4 September 2020 . ^ Samad, Saleem (27 December 2019). ""Remembering the 'Phantoms of Chittagong' "" . Dhaka Tribune . Retrieved 4 September 2020 . ^ Uban, Sujan Singh (1985). Phantoms of Chittagong: the ""Fifth Army"" in Bangladesh . Allied Publishers. ISBN 81-7023-042-X . OCLC 15054054 . ^ John Pike. ""Bihar Regiment"" . GlobalSecurity.org. Archived from the original on 20 April 2015 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 . ^ Jump up to: a b ""India used US spy planes to map Chinese incursion in Sino-Indian war"" . The Hindustan Times . 16 August 2013. Archived from the original on 16 August 2013 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 . ^ ""Nehru permitted CIA spy planes to use Indian air base"" . Business Standard . India. 16 August 2013 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 . ^ ""Book Extract: Spies in the Himalayas By M.S. Kohli and Kenneth Conboy"" . Vayu Sena . 2020. ^ O'Toole, Homas (13 April 1978). ""CIA Put Nuclear Spy Devices in Himalayas"" . The Washington Post . Retrieved 2 September 2020 . ^ Kapadia, Harish (1998). ""Nanda Devi"". In Salkeld, Audrey (ed.). World Mountaineering . Bulfinch Press. pp. 254– 257. ISBN 0-8212-2502-2 . ^ There are many theories about what happened. Likely ones are that the device rolled off the mountain and is now lodged at the bottom of the glacier. More imaginative theories speculate that the supposedly indestructible nuclear power pack with a highly toxic plutonium isotope in its core, with a half-life of many thousand years, is inching its way into the Ganges . Another plausible theory is that another team of Indian mountaineers came up secretly early the next season and spirited the device away for Indian nuclear scientists to study. Many Americans lean towards this, and with the legendary spymaster RN Kao in the picture anything was possible. ^ Madan, Tanvi (27 February 2020). ""The pitfalls and promise of a US-India partnership driven by China"" . Brookings . Retrieved 1 September 2020 . ^ Sawant, Gaurav C (16 September 2020). ""Op Snow Leopard: Inside story of how Army reclaimed heights in eastern Ladakh"" . India Today . Retrieved 3 November 2022 . ^ Jump up to: a b Lalotra (Retd), Col Satish Singh (17 February 2021). ""Perils of a slighted SFF"" . Daily Excelsior . Retrieved 3 November 2022 . ^ ""India-China standoff: Indian Army captures Pangong North Finger 4 in Ladakh"" . Business Today . 2 September 2002 . Retrieved 3 September 2020 . ^ ""India uses commandos from covert Special Frontier Force to stop Chinese misadventure – Misadventure thwarted"" . The Economic Times . 1 September 2020 . Retrieved 2 September 2020 . ^ Som, Vishnu (31 August 2020). ""China Says ""Taking Countermeasures"" As India Foils Ladakh Move: 10 Points"" . NDTV . Retrieved 31 August 2020 . ^ Shukla, Ajai (2 September 2020). ""Ladakh intrusions: Special Frontier Force takes first casualties"" . Business Standard . India . Retrieved 2 September 2020 . show v t e Ministry of Home Affairs (India) Departments Department of Internal Security Indian Police Service Intelligence Bureau Central Reserve Police Force Bureau of Police Research and Development Central Industrial Security Force National Security Guard National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Sciences National Crime Records Bureau National Civil Defence College National Investigation Agency National Crime Investigation Bureau North Eastern Council North Eastern Police Academy Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy Assam Rifles Rashtriya Rifles Narcotics Control Bureau Department of Official Language Central Translation Bureau Central Hindi Training Institute Central Armed Police Forces Border Security Force Indo-Tibetan Border Police Sashastra Seema Bal Central Reserve Police Force Central Industrial Security Force National Security Guards Special Frontier Force Assam Rifles Defence Security Corps Bureaus Bureau of Immigration (India) Narcotics Control Bureau National Crime Records Bureau Central Bureau of Investigation National Crime Investigation Bureau Other departments Department of Jammu and Kashmir Affairs Department of Home Department of States Home secretaries R. N. Banerjee H. V. R. Iyengar A. V. Pai B. N. Jha V. Vishwanathan L. P. Singh Govind Narain N. K. Mukherjee S. L. Khurana T. C. A. Srinivasavaradan S. M. H. Burney T. N. Chaturvedi M. M. K. Wali Prem Kumar R. D. Pradhan C. G. Somiah J. A. Kalyankrishnan Shiromani Sharma Naresh Chandra R. K. Bhargava Madhav Godbole N. N. Vohra K. Padmanabhaiah Balmiki Prasad Singh Kamal Pande N. Gopalaswami Anil Baijal Dhirendra Singh Vinod Kumar Duggal Gopal Krishna Pillai R. K. Singh Anil Goswami L. C. Goyal Rajiv Mehrishi Rajiv Gauba Ajay Kumar Bhalla (incumbent) Home ministers Vallabhbhai Patel Jawaharlal Nehru C. Rajagopalachari Kailash Nath Katju Govind Ballabh Pant Lal Bahadur Shastri Gulzari Lal Nanda Indira Gandhi Yashwantrao Chavan Uma Shankar Dikshit Kasu Brahmananda Reddy Charan Singh Morarji Desai Hirubhai M. Patel Zail Singh R. Venkataraman Prakash Chandra Sethi P. V. Narasimha Rao Shankarrao Chavan Buta Singh Mufti Mohammad Sayeed Chandra Shekhar Murli Manohar Joshi H. D. Deve Gowda Indrajit Gupta L. K. Advani Shivraj Patil P. Chidambaram Sushilkumar Shinde Rajnath Singh Amit Shah (incumbent) Ministers of state for home affairs Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh Kiren Rijiju G. Kishan Reddy (incumbent) show v t e Border protection agencies ( list ) Africa Algeria GNA PAF Angola PGFA SME Benin ABeGIEF DEI USSF Botswana Burkina Faso DPF DSE Burundi CGM PAFE Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad GN GNNT PNT Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo DGM DPF Republic of the Congo DGST DIE Côte d'Ivoire DST ONECI Djibouti Egypt Border Guard PINA Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana BGU GIS Guinea Guinea Bissau Kenya BPU DIS Lesotho Liberia Libya LBG LPA Madagascar Malawi Mali DGGN DNF DPF DRGS Mauritania DGGN DST Mauritius Morocco DGSN DGST GRM Mozambique RPF SENAMI Namibia DICC NAB SFF Niger DST GN GNN Nigeria CMCF NIS Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal DPAF DPETV DST Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa BMA JOD SAIS SAPS South Sudan Sudan BIB GAB GDPI Tanzania Togo DGDN GNT Tunisia DGFE GNT Uganda DCIC FFU Zambia Zimbabwe DIZ PSU Asia Afghanistan Armenia AVV MS NSS SZ Azerbaijan BPQMI DMX DSX Bahrain Bangladesh BGB DIP SB Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China CII NIA PLAGF Border Defense Units Georgia BPG Migratsiis Politsiis SCMI Hong Kong India AR BOI BSF ITBP RR SFF SSB Indonesia Imigrasi Border Security Task Force (Satgas Pamtas) Iran BAFIA Immigration Marzbani NAJA Iraq Israel CPA Magav PIBA Yamam Yamas Japan Jordan BRD DBS Kazakhstan KQQK UQK SQ North Korea South Korea KIS ROK MP Kuwait GDLBS GDR Kyrgyzstan MCK OKMMK Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia AKSEM JIM RS Maldives Mongolia GIKG KKEG Myanmar BGF BGP MIP Nepal APF DOI Oman Border Guard DGPR Pakistan DGIP FC GB Scouts PR Palestine Philippines Qatar Border Guard GDP Saudi Arabia GDBG GDP Singapore Sri Lanka DIE NBMC Syria Border Guard BSF IAPD Republic of China (Taiwan) Tajikistan MS QS KDAM Thailand BPP IB TP Timor-Leste SM UPF Turkey GIGM Göçmen Hudut JGK Turkmenistan DMG DSG United Arab Emirates Border Guard ICA Manafth Uzbekistan DXX CQ MvaFRBB Vietnam Yemen Border Guard IPNA Europe Akrotiri and Dhekelia Albania Andorra Immigration UFE Austria BFA LPD Belarus DPK UGIM Belgium IBZ DGA Bosnia and Herzegovina GPBiH SPS Bulgaria DM GDBP Croatia UIDUP UZG Cyprus CRMD YAM Czech Republic OAMP SCP Denmark HS Politi SIRI US Estonia Finland Migri RVL France DCPAF DGEF OFII OFPRA Germany BAMF BPOL Gibraltar BCA Greece DAM KAPS Guernsey Hungary Border Guard OIF Iceland Ireland GNIB INIS Italy DCIPF DLCI GdF L'AC Jersey Latvia PMLP RS Liechtenstein APA LaPo SBG Lithuania MD VSAT Luxembourg Immigration PGD Malta IMA MPF AFM Moldova BMA PF Monaco Montenegro Netherlands AVIM IND KMar North Macedonia Norway Grensekom GSV PU UDI UNE Poland SG UDSC Portugal AIMA Romania IGI PFR Russia GUVM PSFSB San Marino Serbia KIRS UGP Slovakia MÚ ÚHCP Slovenia SMP SUNZ Spain CGEF GC OAR SEM Sweden NOA SMA Switzerland SBG SEM Ukraine DMS DPSU United Kingdom HMPO IE UKBF UKVI Vatican City North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize BMA DINS Canada CBSA IRCC Costa Rica DGME Fronteras Cuba BF DIIE Dominica Dominican Republic CESFRONT DGMRD FTC-1 UPF El Salvador Border Patrol DGME DISEFRO Greenland Grenada Guatemala DIPAFRONT IGM Haiti DIE POLIFRONT Honduras DNSPF INM Jamaica Mexico GN INM Nicaragua Panama APAP SENAFRONT SNM Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States CBP DMB ICE USBP USCIS Oceania American Samoa Australia Federated States of Micronesia Border Control Immigration Fiji BAF FID Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea ICA PNGDF Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu BV VIS South America Argentina DNM GNA Bolivia Border Police DIGEMIG UPCOM Brazil BPFron GESFRON PF Chile CdC JENAMIG Colombia Ecuador Guyana DOC GPF Paraguay Peru Migraciones PNP Suriname Immigration KMP VZ Uruguay Venezuela GNB Immigration SAIME International United Nations International Organization for Migration CIS European Union Non-recognized Donetsk MS DNR SPO DNR Kosovo DCAM DPK Luhansk SPO LNR UMS LNR Northern Cyprus Somaliland SIBC Transnistria PU MGB UPVM MVD Defunct Albania (till 1939) Byzantine Empire Czechoslovakia (till 1939) East Germany Estonia (till 2010) Germany (till 1945) Italy (till 1943) Liechtenstein (till 1923) Poland KOP (till 1939) BPT (till 1991) Roman Empire Soviet Union Spain (till 1940) Portugal SEF (till 2023) United Kingdom IND (till 2007) BIA (till 2008) UKBA (till 2013) West Germany Border guard Coast guard Customs Law enforcement agency Types Intelligence agency show v t e Law enforcement in India Law of India Constitution Amendments Basic structure Directive Principles Fundamental Duties Fundamental Rights Judicial Review Criminal Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam Capital Punishment Cognisable offence Civil and Personal Code of Civil Procedure Modern Hindu law Christian Personal law Muslim Personal Law Historic Code of Criminal Procedure Hindu Personal Law History of Indian law Indian Penal Code Judiciary Supreme Court Chief Justice Judges High Courts Chief Justices Judges District Courts Chief Judicial Magistrate Court District Munsiff Court Subordinate Courts Gram Nyayalayas Lok Adalat Tribunals Ministries & departments Central Law Commission Ministry of Home Affairs Ministry of Law and Justice States Bihar Kerala Maharashtra Tamil Nadu Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Crimes Against children Against women Caste related Corruption Human rights Mass surveillance Rape Suicide Organised Drugs Black money Hawala Paid media Scandals Terrorism Records and tracking National Crime Records Bureau Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems Intelligence agencies Bureau of Police Research and Development Directorate of Revenue Intelligence Intelligence Bureau Joint Intelligence Committee National Technical Research Organisation Research and Analysis Wing Special Group Special Frontier Force Investigation agencies Central Bureau of Investigation Central Bureau of Narcotics Directorate General of Income Tax Investigation Enforcement Directorate Investigation Division of the Central Board of Direct Taxes Narcotics Control Bureau National Investigation Agency National Counter Terrorism Centre Wildlife Crime Control Bureau Police Police service Indian Police Service Delhi Uttar Pradesh Uttarakhand West Bengal Police ranks Commissioner Director general National Police Memorial Police brutality Police Complaints Authority Research and Training Bureau of Police Research and Development Indian Police Foundation and Institute Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy Central agencies Assam Rifles Border Security Force Central Armed Police Forces Central Industrial Security Force Central Reserve Police Force Commando Battalion for Resolute Action Rapid Action Force Government Railway Police Home Guard Indo-Tibetan Border Police National Security Guard Railway Protection Force Special Protection Group Sashastra Seema Bal Union territories Andaman and Nicobar Chandigarh Delhi Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu Jammu and Kashmir Ladakh Lakshadweep Puducherry States Andhra Pradesh Arunachal Pradesh Assam Bihar Chhattisgarh Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Sikkim Tamil Nadu Telangana Tripura Uttar Pradesh Uttarakhand West Bengal Armed and tactical units Anti-Terrorism Squad Counter Insurgency Force Eastern Frontier Rifles Force One Greyhounds Kerala Thunderbolts Mizoram Armed Police Punjab Police SWAT Team Special Operations Group (Jammu and Kashmir) Special Operation Group (Odisha) Special Tactical Unit Uttar Pradesh Provincial Armed Constabulary Uttarakhand Provincial Armed Constabulary Bar Bar Council Attorney General Solicitor General Additional Solicitor General Advocate General See also Emergency phone numbers 1-0-0 1-0-8 1-1-2 Indian Armed Forces Indian nationality law Judicial activism Number of police officers Pendency of court cases Uniform Civil Code show Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Retrieved from "" https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Special_Frontier_Force&oldid=1272818418 "" Categories : Special forces of India Paramilitary forces of India Research and Analysis Wing Non-military counterterrorist organizations 1962 establishments in India Military units and formations established in 1962 Tibetan refugees Tibetan diaspora in India Hidden categories: CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Indian English from June 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from August 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 This page was last edited on 30 January 2025, at 08:58 (UTC) . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Edit preview settings Search Search Toggle the table of contents Special Frontier Force 7 languages Add topic"
